---
title: Why the CEO of Theranos is wrong about diagnostic (allergy) testing - Diagnostic epidemiology 101
layout: post
author: Corinne Keet
---



In this week’s [New
Yorker](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/12/15/blood-simpler),
Elizabeth Holmes, the CEO of Theranos, a $9 billion company trying to
disrupt the world of laboratory testing, was quoted arguing against
physicians as gatekeepers of lab tests: “The fact that in some states
it’s illegal for someone to be able to get basic data about their
body-for example, you’re pregnant or you’re not, **you have an allergy
or you don’t. Not a lot of sophistication has to go into the
interpretation of that test**.” [Emphasis added]. As an epidemiologist
who studies allergies and an allergist, I have to wholeheartedly
disagree with this statement, and the problems with this statement
have profound implications for the overall business model of Theranos.

Allergy testing, and particularly food allergy testing done by blood
(specific IgE), is actually very difficult to interpret. There are two
key measures of how good a diagnostic test is: sensitivity and
specificity. **Sensitivity** is a measure of how well a diagnostic
test identifies those who have a disease. **Specificity** is a measure
of how well it identifies those who do not have a disease. No
diagnostic test has perfect sensitivity or specificity, but food
allergy testing has especially poor specificity (meaning that a fair
number of people without food allergy test positive). Making things
worse, food allergy is relatively uncommon, making it more likely that
a positive test labels someone as food allergic who doesn’t really
have food allergy.

For example, if we took all children in the US, [approximately 10%
would test positive to
peanut](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0091674910011401),
while only [about 1% have peanut
allergy](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23992749). That means that
if you tested all kids in the U.S. for peanut allergy, 90% of positive
tests would be false positives. Even if you used the higher cut-offs
recommended in guidelines for interpretation of these tests, most
positive tests would still be false positives, and with the higher
cut-off you would [miss a lot of real
positives](http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(12)01196-7/fulltext).
False positives are not harmless, because they can cause fear, have
social consequences and because [unnecessary elimination diets can put
people at nutritional
risk](http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(13)02736-X/abstract). Of
course, this doesn’t mean that food specific IgE is a useless test –
just that we need to be judicious about who we test, and sophisticated
about how we interpret the results in the context of other clinical
data.

Admittedly, allergy testing is worse than most diagnostic tests,
making it a particularly unfortunate example of the health benefits of
direct-to-consumer testing*, but no laboratory test has perfect
specificity. Even much better diagnostic tests have some false
positives. Because the rate of these false positives depends on how
likely someone is to have the disease before you test them, there are
always going to be a lot more falsely positive tests if you expand
diagnostic testing to low risk groups.

If the goal is to “redefine the paradigm of diagnosis away from one in
which people have to present with a symptom in order to get access to
information about their bodies to one in which every person…has access
to actionable health information at the time it matters”, as Holmes
puts it, then we’re going to have to accept a lot more false positives
than the current system. As a society, we’ll need to think about how
to deal with the consequences.

*Interestingly, it doesn’t look like allergy tests are actually on
 Theranos’ [menu of tests](http://www.theranos.com/test-menu?ref=footer).

